we discover an expanding universe. If
we're expanding, it is vast in every
metric we've ever established for it.
There are things that are vast in size,
in temperature, in speed. Just to get a
feel for that, take a tree and expand it
to be the size of the observable
universe. Then the plank scale would
expand roughly to the size of an atom.
So the plank scale is to an atom as a
tree is to the universe. This very
quickly leads you to have even greater
existential dread because if you run the
movie backwards, it gets to a point
which seems quite catastrophic where
these galaxies are literally on top of
each other and eventually you're kind of
imagining something that's so dense that
you have to start thinking of it as hot,
soupy and and and chaotic. The reason
why you can't put quantum mechanics into
it, it already seems to have quantum
mechanics embedded in a deep and subtle
way that Einstein himself didn't
recognize. Oh, please tell cuz my edible
just kicked in. And this is fascinating.
You can't put something into something
there. We just don't know where it is
inside of that thing. But once we find
it in there, we're going to be like,
"Yo, that's where it is." And be like,
"I told you not to put it in there. It
was already in there. That's simple.
It's elegant. It's profound. It's
amazing. I agree.
[Music]
So maybe it's not the photon being
pulled, maybe the space itself is being
warped and the photon is like surfing on
the space. And so it's just like, "Yeah,
man. This wave is awesome. And so you
see it curve, right? But if that's the
case,
um why can't it escape a black hole?
Because does that mean that the space
inside of a black hole is being folded
in so that even the photons can't get
out? Yeah, essentially.
Sparkly,
but but I want to be Morpheus, he says.
You can't be Morpheus. I said why not?
He said because I'm Morphe. It's a
stupid conversation. You ever hear those
guys that sing in that really really low
voice like Profundo
Profundo. Profundo. It's like you can
almost see the vocal cords vibrating.
Oh my god. That's pretty good. Oh, look.
I'm live.
[Music]
Hi J. Nice. Hey Richie number one. Hey
man,
the crowd is ready for it. I got you. I
got you.
No, I don't do the back. Then I sit on
it and I got a butt sticking out like
this. I So this is where in 1920 we
didn't know if there were other
galaxies. Oh wow. Yeah. I mean we
thought we were the main character the
whole what the Milky Way was the
universe. Oh yeah. Yeah. Emanuel Khan
even in the 1700s imagined that some of
these fuzzy things were island
universes. I can't hear his name without
so
Stop saying it. Stop. Okay. Island
universes.
You think so? I have uncommonly fast. I
was wondering maybe
uncommonly found.
What do you What do you see? Yeah. Okay.
I I want to double check it now. He's
getting a little He's getting a knuckle
there. So, you're pretty fast. Let me
see.
He was like
[Music]
Oh man, that's right. Okay.
Damn.
Nice. That was nice. But you got it,
too.
[Music]
So before we begin, I just want I didn't
know this until today that the two of
you are actually current collaborators
on some research. Could you just just
highlight what that is? What are you
doing? I mean, Brian and I have been
working together for years, but mostly
we've been thinking about extra spatial
dimensions and different cosmological
implications implications for
theoretical physics. You know, hiding
some dark energy and some extra
dimensions as one does. As one does.
Yes. You're you're thinking about higher
dimensions. Yes. Because the the three
plus time dimensions are not enough for
you. Well, you know, even Einstein when
he started working wondered why three. I
mean, it's a curious question. Once you
start Well, it's a magic number. Yeah.
Is it your favorite number? Wait. Those
are schoolhouse rock people right there.
They count to three. They They got it
right away.
Okay. But how many dimensions are there
really? Uh, we don't know. But certain
theories tell us that it could be much
more than the ones that meet the eye. So
it could be as many as 10 or 11. Oh,
like gender.
[Laughter]
But you I said it and now I'm getting
arrested.
You just make up other dimensions. I
mean, it sounds like you're pulling it
out of your ass. I mean, sorry.
Yeah, it it it's all you didn't deny
that immediately. That was worried about
this. Okay. Well, partly it is, but it
is also deep mathematical reasons that
lead us to these ideas. Yeah. And you
know, we figure if nature uh can try
some experiments, she will. So, every
possibility might actually happen. Okay.
So, we're just exploring. All right. How
much weed do you guys smoke?
All right. So, complete silence.
The microscope and telescope were
invented 400 years ago. And like I said,
they take us to the grandest visions of
our understanding of our place in the
universe and the tiniest visions that
also give us an understanding of our
place in the universe. And so this those
first steps were magnified at the dawn
of the 20th century, especially through
the 1920s. And so let let's start out
with the large and we'll end with the
small. Okay. So let's go back to the
roaring 20s. Let's just do that. And
here's something that it's hard to even
believe that just 105 years ago, we
didn't know if there were other
galaxies.
We just thought all the stars in the
night sky,
the Milky Way was the entire universe.
There was no, we weren't given reason to
think anything of there were these fuzzy
things in the sky. Okay, they're just
fuzz. We call them nebula which is Latin
for for fuzz. Yes. Thank you. So So we
just thought it was just space lint.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And and but some fuzz
lint space now you mess nebula. Some
nebula were spiral-shaped
and others were irregular.
And the irregular ones were found
in the plane of the galaxy.
Whereas the spiral ones were in every
direction you looked. Interesting. So
that was odd. It was a first thing.
Well, maybe we can unpack this and
figure out what's going on. So there was
a famous debate took place in 1920
at the national hosted by the National
Academy of Sciences
between
Heber D. Curtis. Yes. Unfortunate name.
He had that name. and Harlo Chappley
soon to become the director of the
Harvard College Observatory and Heber
Curtis was director of the Alagany
Observatory. Two very different Yeah,
I'm going to say one of those sounds
more expensive. All right. So they
debated whether these spiral things were
other galaxies
with a term coined by Emanuel Kant in
the 1700s who thought about this
philosopher.
Yes, Chuck. No, Brian Brian is did it to
me, man. I'm sorry. What did Brian do to
you? because he knows I can't hear the
name Emanuel Kunt without
being 12 years old. Okay, I'm so sorry.
Okay, so he he's a philosopher, deep
thinking philosopher. He looked up and
he saw these spiral objects and he he
thought of them as possible island
universes. Oh, that's that's pretty
cool. An island universe. That's
beautiful. That is. But we didn't have
evidence to say that to to support it.
But it was a deep idea at the time. So
there they are. They debated this
and but based on what evidence? Just hot
taken. They're scientists. Okay. All
right. Which means sometimes we have
rosecolored glasses towards the past.
Yes. I get it. I get it. So here's how
it works. Two scientists argue
there's a pact implicitly signed before
they even begin, which is either
you're right and she's wrong, you're
right and he's wrong, or you're both
wrong. They know this going into the
conversation. It's nerd Thunderdog.
So, two scientists enter.
Two scientists leave, but one's a little
embarrassed.
Pay-per-view Saturday nights. Yeah. So,
so here's this was their This is their
Tyson, Jake Paul. Real kind of
throwdown. So, let's go to the Harvard
fellow. Yeah. Cuz you can always tell a
Harvard man, but you can't tell them
much.
Oh, got it. Got it. So, they they were
insufferable back then as well. Got it.
Were they also like I went to school in
Boston?
you. Just say it. Just say it. So
say it, you know. I don't know. All
right. So back to the here's what
happened. Let's merch. Uh Shappley was
heavily invested in the entire night sky
being part of the being the whole
universe and the Milky Way. and he had
evidence at the time from a fellow
astronomer who had looked at the spiral
nebula and claimed that he found them
having moved on the sky.
Now, if you're really really far away,
that's essentially impossible to
measure. But if you're close up and
you're moving, you can see that
movement. Okay? Things that are close to
you. So the example here is if I see a
plane moving across the sky and then I
see a bird moving at the same angle. I
don't conclude that the bird is going
600 mph the bird is much closer. So at
much lower speeds I can see it cross my
field of view. So because it's closer
that evidence suggested that the spiral
nebula were nearby and he he bet on that
horse but it was the wrong horse.
He he was he he was doing what a good
scientist will do. He took the data put
his confidence in the data. It was later
shown that the data he was basing his
argument on was false.
It could not be verified by the work of
other scientists. In fact, no, the
spiral nebula had no motion across the
sky. And so, Shappley was just wrong.
Later, we would later show that he's
wrong. And
what puts the nail in the coffin?
1923,
Edwin Hubble. Oh, the man. Hubble was a
person before he was a telescope. Yeah.
I thought I thought he he was born a
telescope. Born a telescope.
Yeah. Just like when you're a kid,
you're like, "Of course you there was
Ninja Turtles and they were birthed and
Yeah, there it is. There it is. So, you
had an idea based on evidence and it
turned out to be wrong because the
evidence was flawed. So, this there's
some lessons there. All right. And if
one scientist has one bit of evidence,
you don't alert the authorities yet
until there's confirming other
experiments to do so. That is uh what
the peer review is all about. That's the
peer review is all about. And by the
way, for anybody who wants to know, uh
scientists are haters. Okay? That is
what they do. You come up with something
and somebody goes, I call And
then it's on. Then it's just on. Wait,
wait. So Neil, so Neil, a peer review to
to us non-scientists is is basically
it's scientific group chat where you
present your takeer information and the
17 other friends that are in the group
chat get to be like like
and Sapply had a had a green bubble in
in the chat. That's Oh godamn.
God damn. What a horrible what a
horrible life to live. He was the one
green. He was the one green surrounded
by blues.
Yeah. And if you have an idea and it's
and it's shown to be wrong, Yeah. then
it's just wrong. In fact, Einstein after
his relativity, which we'll get into in
a couple of minutes, uh that was hard to
accept by people, right? There was, you
know, it was it was hard. It was very
counterintuitive.
Someone came up with a work saying 100
against Einstein.
100 against Einstein. And then he's
rumored to say what after that? See, I I
I just learned this anecdote, but he's
rumored to have said, "Why 100?" If I'm
wrong, one would have been enough.
Wow. Yeah. It's pretty great. Yeah. And
believe me, I I've been married for 27
years. That is right.
Good enough.
Okay. So, here's what happened. So Edwin
Hubble is curious about these spiral
nebula and he finds a star in them that
matches a kind of star that's not in a
nebula that's just sort of nearer by
than that star and it's it's a very
specific kind of variable star uh named
after the very first of its kind sephiid
variable uh the first of its kind was
found in the constellation Sephiius and
so that's how we categorize types of
variable stars. The first one in a
constellation. All the others, no matter
where you find them, are that variety.
Found a sephiid variable there. And what
was tell us what's special about the
sephiid variables. Well, they have a
very predictable property where their
luminosity, how bright they shine, is
related to a sort of oscillation. And
you so you can tell uh that you're
looking at precisely one of those. It's
it's very easily identifiable if you get
the luminosity out of it. Yeah. Then you
can say I can see the the period vary,
right? Based on that period, I know how
bright it should be. How bright it
should be. So it's as though you knew
your light bulb, right? You can tell if
you have a very bright light bulb far
away or a very dim light bulb up close,
right? But how can you distinguish the
two? And how do you distinguish the two
if you know nothing about the light
bulb? But if you know everything about
your light bulb, yes, you know exactly
what it is. Then you can say, "Oh, I
know this light bulb, so I know exactly
how far away it So he says this star is
of this particular luminosity and the
only way it can be that dim Mhm. is if
it is far out far away. You know
everything happens in space and space is
happening in spaceime. In the four
dimensions of spacetime there can never
be a time without a place and vice
versa. If I say meet me, you will need
to know where and what time to make that
happen regardless of the place
throughout the entire universe. Well,
how would you like to give the gift of
spacetime? Suppose I told you you could
mark any occasion with a beautiful
physical representation of its
corresponding spacetime. Well, thanks to
our friends at Underlucky Stars, you can
do just that. Underlucky Stars makes
beautifully designed star maps that show
the unique alignment of the stars in a
place and date chosen by you. Whether
it's a birthday, an engagement, wedding,
or when you first met, the stars never
look the same twice. Each star map can
be personalized with your unique title
and footnote. Now, I have three
children, and I gave each one of them a
birthday star map. Each one has the same
message. This is the sky under which
Morgan entered the universe. This is the
sky under which Aiden entered the
universe. And this is the sky under
which Charlie entered the universe. And
they love it. And so will your mother,
brother, sister, father, wife, child,
best friend, or even your boss. You
know, if you're that kind of employee
because you're giving them the most
unique commemoration of a significant
life event that they will always
cherish. So don't wait. You can even go
super meta and give them a star map of
the day you gave them a star map. All
right. Okay. Maybe I'm prone to being a
little extreme, but perhaps you'll just
start with an important date. Go to
underluckystars.com
and immortalize the happiest moments of
your life. That's underluckystars.com.
And now back to the spaceime that is the
show. But it's important to know what he
actually meant by that because Hubble
himself never was convinced that these
were actually other galaxies. He proved
that there was something beyond the
outskirts of our galaxy. We knew our
galaxy about 100,000 lighty years
across. He his analysis showed this to
be 900,000 lighty years. We now update
it to 2 million lighty years. But Hubble
was so conservative that he was
unwilling to then say this is an island
universe. This is a galaxy in its own
right. What an idiot.
Wait, what's the difference just from a
space real estate standpoint? What's the
difference between an island universe
and a galaxy? What are we talking?
They're poetically identical. They're
the same. They're the same. Poetically
identical. Got it. Yeah. Okay. Yeah.
Because if our galaxy is our
universe and there's another galaxy,
then you get to call that a universe.
Except once we see the full breadth of
it all, we got to reallocate how we use
the word universe.
Cuz it's universe,
one
in one verse, right? But we're in we're
in the we're in the the multiverse
Spider-Man. We're in the We'll get to
that. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. We'll get
to that. All right. Minus the
Spider-Man, but we'll we'll we'll we'll
You didn't like the second one.
I thought it was great. So So Jana, how
did we're reeling from the fact that we
are not the universe. We're just a part
of a universe. And then a few years
later, Hubble
discovers that these spiral nebula
are in motion, body and soul. So what's
going on there? Yeah. So once he's
starting to be able to use these sephiid
variables and these standard candles to
get a strong sense of how far away
things are, he can start do that. He can
start to do that kind of mapping out the
local environment, what what we have
right nearby and then also galaxies
further away, these little smudges on
the sky. And he begins to catalog not
only that there are other galaxies
around us at great distances but there
also seem to be receding away from us
largely predominantly. Yeah. And so he
makes a plot of makes a plot. So this is
very strange. I mean you're looking at
all of these enormous galaxies. So, a
galaxy is a collection of hundreds of
billions of stars and they're pretty
localized and maybe they're spirals and
uh blobs and they're very far away and
they're also moving away from us in
every direction which is very peculiar.
So, he makes this plat. It's completely
freaky but it gets freakier because the
further away they are the faster they're
expanding away from us and they're
calculating this all without computers.
Well, hundreds of billions people were
called computers back then.
Sure. Yeah. If you look at old
dictionaries, look at the word computer.
A person who makes the person who
computes. Yes. So, wait. Uh, and there's
a room full of Yes. But they're doing it
without the machines. The a room full of
computers at Harvard at the time. Yes.
So, he actually uses the work of one of
the Harvard computers, which was a woman
named Henrietta Levit. And um she was
part of a group of women who worked at
the Harvard Observatory that were called
up like this.
Well, they were called Pickering's Harum
because Charles Pickering at one point
was so frustrated with his male
computers that he fired them all and he
said, "My maid could do a better job."
And he hired his maid who was Willamina
Fleming and she did a great job.
Um, and she hired all these other women
and one of whom was Henrietta Levit and
she made 30 cents an hour.
Go ahead.
Are we applauding her or her pay?
That was weird. 30 cents an hour. That's
She should be making iPhones.
Okay, so
I said it. I said it.
All right, so but mixed in here, we've
got simultaneous things going on.
Einstein's general theory of relativity
is already at the races. Okay, so that
came in in 1915. 15. Okay, that gave us
a mechanism to understand what the whole
universe could be doing. Just catch us
up on that. Well, Einstein writes down
his equations in 1915 and initially he
applies them to things like the motion
of the earth around the sun and
terrestrial and nearby motion, local
things. But then some other very
creative thinkers, one in particular was
a Belgian priest named George Lamemetra.
He
decides to apply the mathematics not to
something in the universe but to the
entirety of the universe and find from
the equations that the universe should
be expanding over time. It should be
just to be clear, he was able to do that
not based on his training as a priest.
He was a priest physicist.
He was a priest physicist. But no doubt
his interest in applying these ideas to
the entirety of the universe was not
distinct from his focus on the big
questions of existence. So they weren't
that separate. Although he in his own
mind was very clear. He said there are
two ways to have deep insight about the
world. There's mathematics and there's
salvation. And he said, "Let me follow
both." And that's what he did. But not
intermingled. He was very clear not to.
There was a line in the sand.
Absolutely. Yeah. Wait. So what? So So
matra,
I'll let I'll let you guys figure out
the pronunciation. So he takes the
equations. We We have an expanding
universe, but he So Lamatra before
before Lumatra predicts an expanding
universe using Einstein's equations.
Yes. So Einstein could have made the
prediction and he didn't. Yeah. In fact,
in 1917, Einstein actually got there
first and when he applied the equations
to the entirety of space was very
disturbed that he couldn't get a
universe that met his own philosophical
prejudice which was that the universe is
fixed, eternal, static and unchanging.
Why would anybody think the universe
could be anything other than that? Well,
I mean there is this book called Genesis
which seems to suggest a beginning.
Okay. So, there are some people who
think perhaps that that vision is not
correct. But Einstein and many others at
the time very firmly believed that the
universe could not change on the largest
of scales. And that's just a
philosophical bias. Totally. And in
fact, heat changes. Wait, wait, wait,
wait. How could he how could he get away
with that? If all the galaxies have
gravity and if they all feel each
other's gravity, they would all collapse
down into one point. Yeah. So this was
an argument that Isaac Newton actually
gave hundreds of years earlier. But if
the universe is infinitely big and if
the galaxies are spread across an
infinity of space then there is no
center for them to collapse toward. So
you can envision a static universe. Now,
if it's infinite, if it's infinite, if
and only. But even more than that,
Einstein then in his own general
relativity recognized basically the
issue that you're raising in a finite
universe. And he said, "Let me introduce
a repulsive push to counter the
attractive pull of gravity." And
anti-gravity, an anti-gravity force
field called the cosmological constant.
So he introduces this into the math in
1917. It was not in the 1915 equations.
He introduces it just to have a static
universe that will allow him to breathe
easy and to fulfill his philosophical
bias. Then the mantra says we can have
an expanding universe. And so how did
Einstein react to that? Einstein learns
of this from lametra in 1927
and he says to lamera your calculations
are correct but your physics is
abominable.
Oh them fighting words. They were
fighting words. Wait, by which he was
saying you can't trust that every
mathematical calculation tells you
something real about reality. Some math
should be in math textbooks and it's
interesting but it's nothing more than a
mathematical curiosity. And he says,
Lmetra, your idea of an expanding
universe, that's a mathematical
curiosity. It's not real. Okay. So then
1929, Hubble discovers an expanding
universe. Now what? What happens next?
Well, so it's interesting because the
way I originally described it is kind of
confusing. You might think it makes it
seem like we're at the center of this
expansion and everything's receding away
from us. But the way the Hubble law is
specifically, it's much more like the
space between every galaxy is actually
stretching. So from their point of view,
if you were on one of those other
galaxies, it would also look like
everything,
right? Everything's receding away from.
And if you imagine that it's not the
galaxies literally moving on spacetime,
but actually the distance between the
galaxies that's stretching, then
something further away is actually
moving away from you faster. There's
more space stretching. And this was
really closer to Latra's description.
Not even closer. It simply wasn't
static. So, so just so I'm clear, at
that time they believe there's only one
galaxy in approximately 1925. Just so
I'm following I feel like I'm in a Chris
Nolan right now. I'm watching Tenant.
Let me just let's pause real quick. No,
no. Up until 23, 24, one galaxy. One
galaxy. It wasn't. It was one universe.
One universe. Copy. Yes. Here we are
2025 from what I understand. Yes. Now
there's How many How many universes are
we in now? But are you talking island
universes or are you talking universe?
Universe. I'm talking about the whole
Oh, good God. There's one universe that
we know about filled with 100 billion
galaxies, each of which has on the order
of 100 billion stars. There are
theoretical ideas that Neil is
suggesting we might get to tomorrow uh
that that speak to the possibility there
might be other universes. So the answer
is we don't know for sure, but the data
seems to suggest that there's one
universe. Well, we we were talking about
this backstage. If the del the delta is
that big between those two numbers which
is one and you just basically said a
gajillion,
how do we know how do we know that the
what we're living in right now, the data
that we know right now isn't going to be
wildly off and 50 years from now or 100
years from now they'll be like look at
those dumb dums in 2025. We hope we hope
that that's what will happen. That's
what we live for. We live to be stupid.
We live to be wrong. We're scientists.
Oh, got it.
So, we lived in Iran. We're scientists.
Got it. Okay. Well, so let's let's
follow through this reasoning. We
discover an expanding universe. If we're
expanding, that means we're bigger today
than we were yesterday and bigger
yesterday than we were the day before.
So,
logically, where does that take us?
Bigger. No, no. going back in time. What
is that? Oh, I'm sorry. So, yeah. So, if
you're already disturbed about the lack
of permanence to the universe, then this
very quickly leads you to have even
greater existential dread because if you
run the movie backwards, then everything
was once closer together. And if you
keep running the movie backwards, it
gets to a point which seems quite
catastrophic where these galaxies are
literally on top of each other. And
eventually you're kind of imagining
something that's so dense that you have
to start thinking of it as hot and uh
soupy and and and chaotic and
then what what did Lamontra call this?
Yeah. So Latra basically said look if
the math is saying that the universe is
expanding today and if then Hubble's
data shows that the universe is
expanding today just wind the cosmic
film in reverse. You run the film
backwards and things get closer and
closer together and there suggests that
there's a point in the distant past when
everything was on top of everything else
and he calls this the primeval atom.
This is the beginning according to his
description. Okay. I happen to know
there was an astronomer active at the
time, brilliant guy named Fred Hy who
was not into a universe that would be
changing. Yeah. He knew the universe was
expanding. He couldn't reason that away.
He accepted that. Yeah. accepted that.
But if you're expanding, but you're
always the same, that must mean matter
is being spontaneously created in the
void to create new galaxies. So that
statistically the universe always looks
the same. Yeah. You know, but here's the
thing. If the universe is expanding,
that in itself is a change. So why would
you not accept a changing universe? Cuz
he wanted to always look the same for
all of time, for all eternity, in the
past and in the future. Again, it's a
philosophical bias, but I think the idea
of a beginning was particularly
disturbing. Wow. The idea. So, so this
primeval atom, the literatur scientists,
but not for religious people where God
made the universe. They're perfectly
happy with the beginning. Look, Pope
Pius I 12th, perhaps the nerdiest pope
in history who love science. Wait, wait,
why do you know this? He I don't know.
He took he took Lmetra's work and he
said, "There is the scientific evidence
for Genesis." That's what he said. And
and when Lmetra heard this, he threw a
fit. Belgian priest Lmetra, the pope is
talking to him d not directly, but yes,
when he catches wind that this is what
the pope is saying. And one of his
students who was in the class that
Lmetra had to teach that afternoon after
learning said that Lamemetra who
normally was very quiet and
mildmannered. He came in and ranted for
45 minutes because his whole point was I
am not blending my religious life and my
scientific life. And here the pope is
taking my scientific work and he's
turning into religion. But notice he
said all that to a student and not the
pope.
You don't want to know the Galileo
situation. Exactly. Yeah. So, I have a a
tamer version of that quote. It's, "As
far as I see, such a theory of the
primeval atom remains entirely outside
any metaphysical or religious question."
Yeah. That's after I had a couple drinks
and chill.
Okay. So, so then it got called the Big
Bang by by Fred Hoy. By Fred Hy. Yeah.
So Fred Hoy was in a 1948 BBC radio
interview. Why do you know this level of
detail about Okay. And so he is
describing his own approach which as you
mentioned is a steadystate approach
where matter is created spontaneously
and fills in the gaps in space. And so
they ask him about this other approach
not his. And he says oh that theory in
which all matter must be created in one
big bang. And that's where the idea of
big bang theory comes from. Now people
have interpreted that as a derogatory
description. His own way of recounting
the story is he was simply trying to
draw a distinction between a theory in
which in his steady state only a little
bit of matter is created here in the air
cross space versus this other theory
like one hydrogen atom per century per
cubic lightyear. I mean there's some
small rate not not quite that small. So
it's it is one atom per century per
Olympic size swimming pool. Oh, okay. I
thought it was bigger than that. And
that's all that you need. And so it's
kind of an in the whole universe. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Because what's more
believable that one little atom forms in
a cubic, you know, in a swimming pool
size arena of space per century or that
there's this moment where everything is
created all at once. Framing it that
way, his theory sounds perhaps a little
bit more believable, less less crazy.
Yeah. Yeah. So what do we have to assume
if there is a big bang? So we got to
assume that the expansion has been
uniform the whole time. Not it doesn't
have to be uniform. Yeah. It can change
over time. Well, that's been always
expanding. It's always expanding. Okay.
And unless there's extra dimensions,
those might All right. Well, so it could
expand differently enough. Brian and I
are talking about this later. Well,
yeah, you can squeeze the other
dimensions there. There could have been
chaotic mixing of the expansion and
contraction but overall the overall
volume of the universe was expanding.
But the way you get this is looking at
the rate at which the universe is
expanding. Yes. And that is a slope on a
graph. And Hubble first derived that and
it's there's a slope. He called it the
letter C which is for constant. But
since then we swapped that out with a
capital H for Hubble and we call it the
Hubble constant. very famous Hubble
constant. So it's constant over space. I
mean it's important over time. It's
really the Hubble parameter we should
call it because it does change in time.
It was it could have been faster in the
early universe, faster in the future.
All right. So Hubble I he had the wrong
turned out uh the sephiid variable he
used
he didn't know at the time there were
two varieties of sephiid variables. The
one that's near us and the one that you
can see from far far away. and he
presumed they were the same. No reason
to think otherwise. So he got the wrong
distance, the wrong expansion rate of
the universe. So Sephias is like
diabetes is type one and type two. Yes,
there's a type one and type two.
Exactly. I think
[Music]
maybe not exactly.
Yes, there's literally type one sephiid
and type two sephiate. And you got to
use apples and apples when you're doing
this exercise. So, so he got an age of
the universe of two billion years. We
would later refine these numbers. Uh,
when I was in graduate school many moons
ago, the uncertainty in the Hubble
constant was a factor of two. It there
was a 10. So, with the with the Hubble
constant, you run the film backwards.
Ask how much time at this expansion rate
looking backwards, when do we get to
time zero? Mhm. That makes sense. Well,
yeah. Just just when is everybody in the
same place at the same time? That's a
perfectly sensible question. And we got
two number. There are two camps. Okay. A
10 billionyear camp and a 20 billion
year camp. A fac a whole factor of two.
And everyone is, you know, fighting for
their and we know they both can't be
right. And so we need better data. One
of the goals of Wait, isn't isn't being
off by 10 billion quite a bit? That's a
lot. But I again comedian and I only
took physics one in undergrad. I did not
advance not I don't want the smoke but I
am saying being off by 10 billion is a
lot. Here's the thing like if you go out
to dinner and we split it and I'm off
by that like that big of a delta. If I'm
if I'm Yeah. If I'm 100% off. Yes. Yes.
Aren't you like you lose your science
little thing? No. So you know what I
mean? like could have been disbarred.
Yeah. Here's the thing. But you know,
you just get to talk your Here's
the thing. You are off by 10 billion.
You get to talk your still. Here's
the thing. Like my dad in the
living room when he's giving his
opinions about politics. He just gets to
run his mouth continuously.
I got this. Go ahead. No, this is me and
my This is a me and my dad thing, but
I'm just a little mad that that that a
capital S scientist was this off. Okay.
Go ahead. Uh and I have a second
question, but go ahead. The universe is
vast. Yes. In time. Yeah. And in space.
It is vast in every metric we've ever
established for it. There are things
that are vast in size,
in temperature, in speed, in gravity.
And so if I'm off by a factor of two,
between 10 billion and 20 billion, yeah,
I could have been off by a factor of 10,
by a factor of a thousand, by a factor
of a million. We were quite happy. We
were in the same sandbox having that
conversation. So it's kind it's kind of
like being Jeff Bezos, you know, if I'm
off by 10 billion, eh, not so bad.
So, so can I also ask you the second
philosophical question which is which is
no no this is this is for real when when
you were like it's either 10 billion or
20 billion and I was asking you this
backstage which was if when the number
is that big is it almost like the United
States's debt where they're like the the
deficit is at 28 trillion and you're
like what does it even matter now it's
at a gajillion manilion like what does
it matter why does the Cuz I feel like a
freshman When I'm done, it's going to
matter an awful lot.
[Laughter]
I would I would say that actually 10
billion is actually quite good. 10 to 20
is very much in the ballpark because you
should run the Federal Reserve.
You should Yeah. Yeah. This stage, you
know, who knows who has a good way to
think about it. You could have been off
by a trillion. Well, but the future is
going to be much much longer than the
past. So, it's not as though the
universe kind of will expire within
another 10 billion years like we're
confined to this number. The future
could be just a huge number. We could be
living in a time where it's not 10
billion. But can I give you perhaps one
these are all very very good answers but
perhaps one other way of looking at it.
You're saying it was a bad question. Bad
question. These are great answers. Bad
question. We don't care whether it's 10
billion or 20 billion. The number
doesn't matter. What does matter is
That's the most American answer by the
way. That's the most American answer.
Yeah, the truth is we don't care. But we
want our theories to work. We want our
theories to make predictions that match
with observations. That's the only thing
that matters to us. The actual answer
that comes out, whether it's 10 billion
or 50 billion or 42 like you're saying,
it just doesn't matter. But we need to
have a consistent description so that we
have evidence that we know what we're
doing because evidence matters. And both
sides could not be right. Right. And so
when the Hubble telescope was launched,
okay, I'm just getting out of graduate
school, it is launched. The number one
goal set for that telescope was to
resolve that discrepancy. The
telescope's named after the guy who gave
us the Hubble constant in the first
place. Within two or three years, we
nailed it. And the Hubble constant, its
value would give us an age of the
universe at about 14 billion years,
which is comfortably between those two
extremes. And that's science working at
its best. It was there's a limit to how
much we can keep beating each other over
the head. Let
let's get more data. Let's build a
telescope that'll solve this. And in
fact, today there is a similar argument
happening. It's not between 20 billion
and 10 billion, which as you say is a
factor of two or 100% difference. Now
we're down to the 5% difference. We
understand things that well that we have
two groups that are 5% apart describing
a number of years billions of years into
the past and that's the precision with
which we can do it within 5%.
People will kill each other.
So again, we don't care the exact
number. We care that we can describe it
with that level of precision when we're
talking about events that happened
billions of years ago. That's the
mindbending. And and here's the issue.
When it was 10 and 20 billion, you
always have to report your uncertainties
for a number in science. And those
uncertainties had a little bit of
overlap in the middle. And it landed
where you expected it to land. Now that
we have two other waring factions on the
value of the Hubble constant, those two
numbers are within 5% of each other, but
the uncertainties are tight. Yeah. So
the uncertainties don't overlap. And if
you look at go Google search on Hubble
tension and that's what will come up.
Adam Ree is coming to Pioneer Works in
October. I just planted an ad coming to
Adam Ree who's a Nobel Prize one of the
Nobel Prize winners who discovered that
the universe is not just expanding. The
expansion is getting over faster. It's
accelerating. Who is part of this Hubble
tension debate uh will be speaking at
Pioneerics on the H without without
waxing without waxing philosophical. I
just don't want to miss this point that
we're not actually saying which is what
makes science so incredibly great is
exactly what you all just uh
demonstrated. It is this pursuit of the
truth based upon the best available
information at the time. So it's okay if
it's wrong because when it's right,
we're going to get there. Yes,
you got it.
All right. So,
we're turning the clock back and
we get to the big bang and but now the
universe large scale universe described
by general relativity is now small.
It is so small you extend the equations
go back. The universe is the size of an
atom. Does quantum physics apply to the
entire universe or only to atoms. What
where does that where where are you on
that both of you? Well, at this point we
feel we have to invoke quantum mechanics
to understand what was happening in the
big bang at the energy scales are so
dramatic and um that we're really
probing quantum physics. high energies,
you're really looking somewhat
surprisingly at small scales. Um, so we
we are still trying to grapple with what
the big bang is telling us about uh the
potential to understand not just general
relativity but a kind of quantum variant
of that if there is such a thing. Yeah.
So I got general relativity, I got
quantum physics. Do they make nice in
the sandbox? That's it's a deep and
difficult question and one that I and
many others have spent their lives
trying to answer and we do not fully
have the answer yet. Let me restate
that. Yeah. That you and others have
spent your lives failing to answer. Yes.
Okay. I agree. But I think this guy
you hear that ah take that. Okay. You
got a fan over here. All right. Go. No,
it's exactly the case. So when you take
Einstein's equations of the general
theory of relativity and you try to
invoke quantum mechanics within the same
calculations which as you eloquently
noted you'd have to do if you're talking
about the whole universe when it's
incredibly small. You need Einstein's
general theory of relativity. It's the
whole universe after all. But you also
need quantum physics because it is so
small and that's the theory that
describes the small things. And when you
try to simply put the equations
together, you get one answer out from
almost any calculation, which is
infinity. And that might sound, oh,
that's interesting, a big, deep,
mystical number. No, it's nonsense.
Infinity is nature's way of grabbing us
by the lapel and slapping us around and
saying, "You're doing something wrong.
You've got to figure this out." So, I've
heard another one. That's where affinity
is where God divides by zero. Yes. Yeah.
Stephen Hawking. Yes. Yeah. Oh, Stephen
Hawking said that. Well, at least that's
what he's attributed to. Okay. Okay. So,
but they you're saying they don't make
nice in the sandbox. Yeah. So, so
there's a limit. What's this plank
length? What's going on there? Well, the
the plank length is is the scale at
which But named after who? After Mox
Plunk, the the uh I love how you say
Mox. I don't know. Is it? What do you
think? Am I say Max Plank? Max. Okay. Uh
well a hundred years ago in the early
discoveries of quantum mechanics was was
uh thinking about whether the universe
was discrete or if it really was a
continuum and um and if I looked for
instance at the air in this room if I
look closer and closer do I find out
it's actually made of individual
molecules moving around and is not
actually continuum and same with water
and um was thinking about these things.
So in other words, mortar is not
infinitely divisible. You get to a
molecule at some point. Eventually you
get to an individual quanta, a little
particulate, a discrete bundle. Um and
in thinking about this, there was sort
of a fundamental scale that that we
would say is when we can definitely no
longer think um in a way where we're
ignoring this quantum scale where we're
forced as Brian's describing beyond that
we're definitely going to strike an
infinity but by the plunk length we're
in trouble. We really should be um
trying to understand the theory of
gravity at a quantum level. Maybe that
means that spaceime is coming in little
individual bundles. I don't even know
how to think about that. I'm just
thinking about correlations between
little tiny spaceime is coming. Yeah,
that was that was wild. That was a wild
sentence. That was Yeah, that was very
Game of Thrones.
Space time is coming.
Well, I mean, if it came from the big
bang, I mean, was it the moment that
space and time was in fact created? Um,
and are we thinking about things of a
continuum of spaceime itself? Brian, how
big is that smallest unit? Uh, the plank
length is 10 the minus 33 cm. And again,
I know the question will be, well, you
know, how do you think about something
that so well, what does it matter was
10us 33 or 10us 31? And again, we don't
care about the exact value, but that's
where the mathematics takes us. And just
to get a feel for that, if you were to
take an atom and uh well, let's take a
tree. Take a tree and expand it to be
the size of the observable universe. A
tree. Yes. Then the plank scale that
10us 33 centimeters would expand roughly
to the size of an atom. So the plank
scale is to an atom as a tree is to the
universe. That's how tiny the distance
we're talking about here.
And why I'm going to channel So, you
measure this, you measure this with a
ruler. What do you Yeah, I know. I'm
going to channel her. Can I channel you
right now? You can channel me. I'm I'm
not going to even pretend like I
understand what's happening right now.
I'm going to be 100% honest. There's
like 3,500 people here and I'm like,
don't act like you know. No, I'm going
to channel. I You lost me at FaceTime is
coming. And by the way, you came in
quite hot, Brian, and you're like, I
know what you're thinking. And that's
not what I was thinking. I was thinking
I think it's really incredible. Let's
just have a quick little tangent here. I
think it's really incredible. It is
almost 9:00 p.m. and this many people
went on ticketmaster.com.
Paid fees you way back there in the up
there. Yes, way up there. Yeah, you guys
paid tickets to learn about space
nebuli. It really
it was very heartening that so that's
what I was thinking about Brian. It was
actually like you know when people say
this country is going to and math
and science is at an all-time low. I'm
like, you know what? It's it's the math
and science lovers, I feel theater on a,
you know, of all things you could be
doing at 9:00 p.m. Just so so I'm
challening Hassan here. Sure. What? Why
do you have any confidence at all that
you know what's happening on a scale
that small? We don't. We don't. Oh,
okay. That's the answer. That's the end.
Thank you. Oh, Chuck, come back. Thank
you. You guys, we don't know anything
and we could be off by a whole lot. Good
night. Take care. Thank you, Beacon. No,
no. So, so let me see if I can unpack
this. Yeah. Um, is it true We're going
to figure it out right now. Do Okay,
sure. Is it true that every prediction
we've ever made with quantum physics
when we've been able to test it has come
true? Absolutely. Okay. Is it true that
general relativity we already know what
its boundaries are because there are
calculations you cannot make because of
this infinity problem. Absolutely.
Therefore, if one of those is going to
succumb to the other, it sounds like
Einstein has to he's going to have to
bow down to the quantum. He's gonna have
bow down to the bend the knee to bend
the knee to the quant. So either quantum
will absorb Einstein or there's a higher
level understanding that'll absorb them
both. I would say it's it's that's true
but also quantum isn't in competition.
We have theories of matter for instance
nuclear forces that we understand they
can be quantized right theory of
electromagnetism can be quantized. So
there are laws of physics and quantum
mechanics is a regime in which we're
understanding the highest energy
attributes of those laws of physics. Now
gravity Einstein's general relativity is
replaced the theory of gravity with this
theory of spaceime this theory of
geometry replace Newton's theory of
gravity replaces Newton's theory of
gravity but it is one of those forces it
should sit with the matter forces and
have a classical regime meaning a regime
in which we don't have to worry about
quantum mechanics things look smooth we
understand general relativity works
beautifully regime sounds very political
very it does it does dictator dictator
It sounds very very USSR. It sounds very
unfortunately everywhere. Okay, got it.
Okay. But then we when we go to the
early universe like the big bang or in
the course of black holes where where
things start to get very extreme, we
want to be able to quantize
that that law of as we have quantized
other things. It's not going to replace
grav. Exactly. It's not going to replace
gravity. We want to quantize gravity.
And that seemed like a perfectly
reasonable request. Okay. Wait, so
Einstein's equations are not quantized.
They require a continuum. Yes. So how do
you quantize gravity? Good. So Jan's
describing the history is very
insightful and useful. So we had an
equation for electricity and magnetism
that came from Maxwell. We were able to
blend that with quantum mechanics giving
us quantum electronamics. It works. We
had equations describing the strong and
weak nuclear forces. We were able to
embed quantum mechanics into those
theories. works wonderfully well. When
we try to play exactly the same game
with Einstein's theory of gravity,
general relativity, and try to put
quantum mechanics in there to quantize
it, it just doesn't work. So, what does
that mean? It means you're not smart
enough to Well, it's an interesting It
could be that we're not smart enough,
and I'm full well willing to take that
as the ultimate answer, but there's a
lot of evidence, if you allow me to come
right up till today for just a moment. I
know you wanted to go to this is the
centennial, but go ahead. Yeah. So, so
there is evidence today that Einstein's
general relativity, the reason why you
can't quantize it, the reason why you
can't put quantum mechanics into it, it
already seems to have quantum mechanics
embedded in a deep and subtle way that
Einstein himself didn't recognize. Oh,
please tell cuz my edible just kicked in
and this is fascinating.
I mean, what you're saying right now is
revolutionary because what you're saying
is you can't put something into
something where the thing is there. We
just don't know where it is inside of
that thing. But once we find it in
there, we're going to be like, "Yo,
that's where it is." And be like, "I
told you not to put it in there. It was
already in there." Okay. Amazing. Chuck
just blew a gasket. We got to
No, that is like that's like that's
simple. It's elegant. It's profound.
It's amazing. I agree.
All right, so let me let's back up back
to the roaring 20s and I just want to go
down the list of completely freaky
things that quantum physics prescribed
that defied anybody's common sense and
which is why it's still freaky. Mhm. I
in fact what's that quote from was it
Fineman about quantum physics? What did
he say? Yeah, there are a few. But if
you think about quantum mechanics
without getting dizzy, you haven't
understood a single single thing about
it. Oh, and I understand it very well.
Okay. So 1923,
the wave particle duality is proposed.
Yeah. So that's kind of freaky. Mhm.
that particles are also waves. Yeah. It
was Prince Louisie De Bruy who basically
he was a prince. Yeah. And so he said
look in 1905 Einstein showed us that
light which we had thought of as a wave
actually needs to be described as a
particle so-called photoelectric effect.
That's how he went5 1905. And then in
1923 in his PhD thesis Louis de Bruy
says let me do the reverse. Electrons we
always think about them as particles.
Maybe they need to be thought of as
waves. Wow. And that is a key moment in
his That was a prince who did that. A
prince. Prince. I don't believe it.
I I I know current monarchy. Not that
intelligent.
Let's be honest.
Harry or William, you're not cooking
you're not cooking this up. There's
there's too much incest. I mean, you
know this. You understand science for
you to be operating at that level. So,
not buying it. Not he cheated off
someone's paper. Not buying it. So, his
PhD thesis, if I remember correctly, was
like 12 pages long or something. Very
short. Very short. Yeah. And he got a
Nobel Prize for Nobel Prize. PF and he
got a Nobel Prize for a 12page PhD. A
PhD paper. Yeah. You should Okay, let me
just say that's the smartest dude ever.
Well, that's how that's how you know he
was royalty. He turned in a 12-page PhD
paper. They're like, "Dr. Prince and
he's Thank you.
double space 12page PhD paper."
Tighter, you know, margin. You entitled
piece of A couple years later,
Neil, you just I'm sorry, Neil. I
shouldn't have shouldn't have uh spoken
ill of the the monarchs there. No, no,
that's this I got this America. We
fought a war to get away from monarchs.
Um, not for long.
Just give it time.
Okay.
So, so then Schroinger came around.
Oh, we have a Schroer fan up. That was
the cat. That was the cat.
That That was the cat. Cat. So what does
Schroinger do for us? Well, Schrodener
begins to think more abstractly
about what's real and what's not real.
So we're used to thinking of particles.
You've already described Deb Brogley and
the electron. We we think of these
little fundamental particles almost like
billiard balls acting out their lives
and they have some concrete existence.
Schroinger starts to say, well, this
wave particle duality, that's pretty
profound, but maybe the only thing
that's real is this thing called the
wave function, which is the probability
for the particle to be in a certain
state, to be in a certain location, to
be moving with a certain speed. But the
particle itself in some sense isn't real
anymore. If you look for it, sometimes
you'll find it in a concrete location.
But what is really determined by
equations, by the laws of physics, is
the wave function, which is this
probabilistic description. And the wave
function occupies physical space,
doesn't it? Yeah, the wave function
occupies physical space for only for a
single particle. So it's a kind of
important subtlety. For one particle,
you can think about this wave function
as filling space. If there are two
particles, it lives in sixdimensional
space. If there are three particles,
it's a nine dimensional space. So you
really can't think of it in these
ordinary terms. Oh, I am high.
Okay. So, so if the particle can be
anywhere here and I have some barrier
here, Mhm. it could show up on the other
side of the barrier. Yeah. Right. But it
doesn't actually travel through. So
let's say your barrier is a concrete
wall. There's some small probability
that you would find the particle. Well,
the wave function would describe the
probability of finding the particle in
this region of space, but it doesn't
actually like a billiard ball travel
through the cement wall. Okay, this
might be the THC talking, but the way
you guys are talking,
there just might just be one particle.
Like, there aren't bunch of particle.
It's just one particle. I told you he
blew a gasket. Well, but but but but
Richard Feineman had the idea that maybe
there was one particle that circled
around through time and cycled back over
and over again, giving what appear to be
many particles now, but there's only a
single particle through this temporal
cycle. So, you're right on target,
moving forward and backwards through
time. I can Oh my god. Okay. Okay. All
right. So, but what I'm saying is if a
particle can show up on the other side
of the the barrier, then that's you guys
came up with a word for that and it's
tunneling. Quantum tunneling. It can
quantum tunnel through the barrier. But
that but that's the the point of
shortinger saying what's real is just
this probabilistic likelihood of finding
the particle. The particle itself in
some sense does not have concrete
existence anymore. It challenges the
whole nature of reality. No, but
concretely there is a probability that
we could calculate Yes. for the
likelihood of you tunneling through the
stage and being underneath the floor.
And it's a nonzero probability. It's
kind of small, so it's unlikely to
happen, but that's what quantum
mechanics tells us. But the smaller I
get, the more likely it will happen.
Exactly. It can happen in the
laboratory. Yeah. Okay. So, just for
context here. Wow. That is we were
trying to understand how the sun made
energy and we did the calculation. Once
we determined the sun is mostly hydrogen
and it's hottest in the center, we said
it must be undergoing fusion. And what
you run the math to undergo fusion, a
proton, y the nucleus of a hydrogen atom
has to merge with another proton, the
nucleus of another hydrogen atom.
Protons have the same charge.
Electrostatically like charges repel. So
they have to be moving fast enough
so that before they have a chance to
repel, they stick together and form a
new nucleus. Okay, we calculated what
temperature that was necessary because
high temperatures give you higher
speeds. We calculated that temperature
and it was 100 million degrees and there
was no way the center of the sun was
going to give us 100 million degrees
because you can calculate through
sensible laws of thermodynamics what
that should be. And we were scratching
our heads. And then quantum physics
comes around and then you invent this
spooky magical thing called tunneling.
And we discover in our calculations that
at a mere 10 million degrees, see these
this matters 10 million, 100 million, at
a mere 10 million degrees, they would
otherwise not hit, but some of them
tunnel through and connect. Tunneling
makes the sun's energy production even
possible. Yeah. And I was like,
because it's not just some some thing
that particle physicists worry about in
their laboratory. I had to worry about
it as an astrophysicist. Why Why are you
worried about this? It's okay. Okay. I
The sun's going to sun, you know.
Robbins, let them let the sun let the
sun do that. Thank you. It's okay. Okay.
Thank you, Neil. Don't Don't blow that.
That's very very okay. So tunneling more
there's a lot tunneling and Yeah. So now
what about the Heisenberg uncertainty
principle? That's that seems like the
biggest thing of them all. Talk me
through that real fast. Yeah, I would
say so that's the real moment when the
old ways of looking at the world are
shown they have to be jettisoned because
the old way of looking at the world,
what is reality? Reality is stuff that's
at a location moving with a certain
speed. That's the way we describe the
world. And Heisenberg with the armature
of quantum mechanics says you can't
actually do that. You can't specify the
location and the speed simultaneously of
any object. You can't do it according to
the quantum equation. So the very
language of reality that we used to use
no longer applies. No longer applies.
Why can't you measure both at the same
time? Well, if you have a particle
described as a wave, right, and you want
that particle to have a definite
location, that wave has to be highly
spiked. So that you can say, ah, almost
100% likelihood it's at this location.
But when you see how the notion of
velocity comes into quantum mechanics,
it has to do with the wavelength of the
wave. And so if you want something to
have a definite speed, it has to have a
definite wavelength. That's not spiky.
So to have definite location, you need
spike. To have definite speed, you need
wave. Those are different shapes. And
you can't have them at the same time.
Can't have them at the same time. Can I
try analogy? Nowhere near as precise as
what Brian just said, but sometimes I
like this musical analogy. If you play a
chord, which is a whole bunch of notes
together, you can play chords, but you
can't simultaneously be playing a single
note. So the chord is like a
superposition of the notes. And how this
relates is that when you're in a precise
location, what Brian's describing as a
sharp spike, you're sort of in a superp
position of velocities or momenta. So
it's like it's like the the location is
the note, the the velocities are the
chords. Or vice versa, if I know the
velocity exactly and I'm playing chords,
I'm no longer playing individual. I'm
I'm playing I can't isolate a single
individual note. I'm in a superp
position of notes. So what is so how
does all this connect to the what they
call the observer effect where you I
want to measure the particle right there
I I got to look at it so I shine light
on it and the light sends it somewhere
else so I can't actually ever know what
the particle is doing right and and so
there's two things in there one is as
you're saying to look is to interact and
when you interact say by bouncing a
photon off a particle you affect the
particle because I need the photon to
take the picture that that's right so
that's one key point that emerges from
these ideas. But the other point that we
can never know anything
on that on that. That's the crazy thing.
Y'all went on this crazy I'm sorry. I'm
sorry. I got that. That is just not
right. Okay. Quantum mechanics tells us
that the things that you thought you
could know are not the things that you
can know. But with quantum mechanics,
we've made predictions of the anomalous
magnetic moment of the electron to 14
decimal places using a theoretical
calculation. And we've measured it and
it agrees decimal by decimal by decimal
on all of those numbers. And that's why
we love these numbers. They show us that
we understand what we're doing.
[Applause]
Okay, Brian just blew a gasket. So you
can know without knowing is what you're
saying. We can know. Let me just say
this, Brian. The type of energy you're
bringing.
All right. Wait, wait. Oh, man. You are
built for CNN. This type of panel smoke.
Oh, fantastic. Yeah. All right. So, this
is so be one of those Street Fighter
squares. The decimal to the decimal to
the Yeah. Oh, it's great. This is great.
This is good stuff. This is good
television.
So, so go ahead Neil. So, this this
observe effect bring us home with
certain has been widely
mis applied by people thinking my
consciousness is affecting the
measurement. Look, there is a big
mystery at the heart of quantum
mechanics. Even with our capacity to
make calculations that agree with
observations to the level of precision
that I just emphasized, perhaps with
unnecessary theatricality, there is
there is a question that we don't know
how to answer, which is what you're
asking. When you observe, you seem to be
able to coax one result, one answer.
Even though the quantum description
embodies many possibilities, we don't
understand how that happens. Is this the
many worlds hypothesis? It's it's one
answer. But the shinger equation is so
beautiful and it does not actually
include in it uh a way to understand how
measurements are made. Yes, that's the
key point. And and so if you really take
the shortage of equation very seriously,
it simply says there are all of these
possibilities and they're all because we
don't have a theory of measurement to
get us through where we are in this in
the physics. Just you know there are
proposals people have put down
mathematical equations that do answer
this question. What is the many worlds
hypothesis? The many worlds hypothesis
is if you have a description of a
quantum system like a particle and the
quantum wave says 30% chance here, 20%
chance here, 50% chance over here, when
you measure it, you don't get only one
result. There's one of you that finds it
over here. There's another one of you
that finds it over here. And there's a
third one of you that finds it over
here. But these are all in different
universes. Oh, it's Rick and Morty.
So you just invented multiple universes
to explain something you can't otherwise
explain. The math invented it. Thank
you, Chuck. Wait, wait, wait. That's
really important. So this guy named Hugh
Everett in 1957 in Princeton. He studies
the math, the very equation that Janna
made reference to, the Schroinger
equation. He says to himself, let me
take the math completely seriously and
see where it takes me. And the math
takes you when you look at the paper,
it's direct to this possibility of there
being multiple universe. It's not made
up. It really emerges directly from an
analysis of the equations and the
equations make predictions that are
confirmed. So you say maybe I should
take this math fully seriously and
that's where it takes you. So the the
passion with which uh Brian is
describing this is like me explaining
why I have glitter on my face when I
come home because I was at an arts and
craft fair.
Is that right?
All right, we're going to have to land
this plane soon. Uh, just briefly, yeah,
I know you spent your career doing this,
but just in 30 seconds, explain string
theory. Oh my god.
20 seconds. Does life have meaning? Go.
I only need 10. No, look, the old
picture was that the fundamental
constituents of matter were little
dot-like particles. The string idea is
that maybe they're little extended
filaments. And why do we introduce this
idea? When you introduce this idea,
quantum mechanics and general relativity
do play well in the sandbox.
So, wow. Okay. And that was less than 30
seconds. Whoa. All right. Okay. So,
what's what's in the future? So I know
astrophysically we don't know anything
about dark matter. We don't know
anything about dark energy. We shouldn't
even name them because we don't know
enough about them to even name them. And
they should be called invisible. I I
should they should call should be called
Fred and Wilma with with no bias. So or
or faster than the light time travel
time travel faster than the light travel
before the big bang. Is what you're
working on or your peeps does it address
any of this? Will quantum mechanics take
us to all the places we need? Yeah, I
mean there's zero evidence that quantum
mechanics has any cracks whatsoever.
It's the only theory that we've written
down in the history. It's the most
successful theory. Most successful
theory ever. And so we which gives you
confidence to believe crazy stuff that
it predicts. Exactly. And so we're
pressing on and ultimately we think
putting general relativity and quantum
mechanics either because they're already
born together or because they're blended
together will be the key to answering
these questions. We're not there yet,
but that's exactly where we're headed.
And why do you need these extra
dimensions? Well, Brian was describing
string theory, which may or may not be
true, but string theory actually
requires extra dimensions for it to make
sense, for the mathematics to allow
gravity and matter and and quantum
mechanics to play nice together. But
even without string theory, the idea
that there are extra spatial dimensions
is just kind of a natural extension when
you start to think about space and time
and you start to take seriously
Einstein's ideas. So now we're we're in
the predicament where maybe those extra
dimensions are harboring the dark
energy. Maybe there's some explanation
for the dark matter having to do with
the extra dimensions. So now we can
start to think of the extra dimensions
as a dark sector um that are harboring
really the resolutions like we're
observing them already. We just don't
have the direct connection to be
certain. So they're visible in plain
sight. Is that what you're saying? Yeah.
Yeah, I mean they're not literally
visible, but maybe dark energy is a
consequence of quantum energies, which
is a paper Brian and I wrote many years
ago. Dark energy. Dark energy, which is
driving the universe to expand ever
faster, which is something we observe.
It is also driving my administration.
I've got to land this plane.
H go on. Go on. Oh, well just that uh we
might be observing through something
like dark energy indirect evidence of
extra dimensions. We can't literally see
into them. We can't point to them. We
can't move around in them yet. But we
are living with the consequence. So
these could be manifestations of these
higher order phenomenon in the universe,
which is part of the motivation for
thinking about them. Perfect sense.
Thank you, Chuck. I just wanted to put a
button on that quote from Einstein in
his denial of quantum physics in spite
of him contributing so mightily to the
field. He you described the
probabilistic nature especially from
Schroinger's equation and Einstein said
God does not play dice with the universe
and Neils Boore retorted Einstein stop
telling God what to do. Okay. You know
you don't know uh if God needs to make
some money real quick. You don't know
that with the dice. Yeah. You know, you
I can see him down.
Papa needs a new universe.
I like how back in the day scientists
threw at each other very
poetically.
The way they, you know, kind of
posted was very the use of Well, we have
good vocabulary to work with. Great
vivid language. They they still do it
the same today.
They do. The way I'm going to land this
plane is offer you a cosmic perspective.
Something that I'm prone to do when we
exposed to this much information. When I
think of the 1920s,
uh, as a scientist, it may be the most
consequential decade ever in the history
of science based on how it influenced
our thought, our the trajectory of our
research that would follow. And but I
want to make a slightly different point.
Before the 1920s,
what are scientists doing? Well, they're
doing sciency things, right? In a lab,
there's a chemical or there's a partic
there's a material or Meyer flask. Yeah.
Yeah. Flask. Thank you. Yes. You flesh
out the picture of your lab. Okay.
Um,
suppose it was the 1920s and you had a
friend, a relative or you were a
politician and you heard that someone is
working on the structure of atoms and
molecules.
You'll say, why does that matter to
anyone? I'm a carpenter. I just care
that my wood atoms cut or that they can
be shined or polished or painted. Why
does that matter to me? making cars and
an assembly line. Why? Why does it
matter to anybody?
You're taking your brilliant intellect
and applying it to something that nobody
cares about except your cadre of people.
But they will tell you, well, it's the
foundations of matter.
And they'll tell you, I don't care.
You're using up
national resources to do this.
Well,
what has happened every time we research
the frontier of science
in basically every frontier of science,
whatever it looks like when you're doing
it, it's easy to say that'll never apply
to anything. I don't why are you doing
that? You wait a little while. They're
clever engineers,
clever other scientists. They see
problems in the world and they see a
possible solution.
Do you realize today
there is no creation, storage and
retrieval
of digital information without an
exploitation of the quantum.
The IT revolution that is responsible
for nearly half the GDP of the world at
some level
was birthed in that decade at a time
when people are just exploring the edge
of our understanding of the world. Yeah,
it would take 50 years longer than what
is typical for an R&D project to show up
as a household product.
But all I can tell you is if you know
anyone who says we're doing too much
science or this science is not relevant
to me or I don't know why you're doing
this. That doesn't sound like it makes
sense.
What you're doing is you're cutting out
at the kneecaps the legs of a future
waves of discovery that could transform
civilization. not only take us to where
we might want to go, but possibly solve
problems that we might have created for
ourselves.
So
there is nothing more shortsighted in
this world than anybody running up and
say we should do less science because
every one of us in this room has been
touched by it.
[Applause]
And there's no greater demonstration of
that than the science that unfolded in
that decade, the 1920s. That's the
quantum side of it. In the astrophysics
side, that birthed our understanding of
the beginning of the universe and how
the sun makes its energy. We would then
learn how the stars manufacture elements
in their core.
We would learn take a few more decades
exploiting the quantum applying to to
other realms of science.
We would learn
that the very ingredients of our bodies,
the carbon, the oxygen, the nitrogen,
the iron are traceable
to stars that underwent thermonuclear
fusion following all the rules of
quantum physics. And those stars
exploded, scattered that enrichment
across the galaxy,
creating the environment, the chemical
ingredients to make star systems with
planets and on some of those planets
life.
So that that era not only gave us our IT
revolution, it gave us an awareness of
ourselves that borders on the spiritual.
And it's the fact that not only are we
alive in this universe
because of our ingredients are traceable
to stars, the universe is alive within
us
[Applause]
[Music]
and that is a cosmic perspective. This
this has been Star
live from the Beman Theater.
[Applause]
This is like our fifth time at the
Beacon Theater. Fifth or sixth time. And
you guys have been a marvelous audience
for us. We love you all. And
Oh, no. Thank you.
And uh but more than loving you all, we
love the support you give for science
because there is no future of
civilization without it. We might as
well just move back to the cave. So as
always, Neil deGrasse Tyson here
thanking our panel. I we got Chuck Nice,
Brian Green,
Chad 11,
Hassan Minaj,
Neil Degrass, Tyson, you're a personal
astrophysicist as always, bidding you to
keep Oh, eight of you knew this. Okay,
we're going to do it one more time. Come
on.
All right, here we go. What's the
tagline? Let me just do it. Okay. Neil
grass Tyson, your personal
astrophysicist. Bidding you. Bidding you
to. Keep looking up. Keep looking up.
Here we go. Remember, it's he's going to
go. And remember those eight people,
they cared. You guys all paid money,
rusty, currency, a real number that we
know. Brian, we know exactly how much
you paid to those sharks at ticket
master. them. Now
he's going to go. Neil Gyson to keep and
you go looking up. Here we go.
Neil deGrass Tyson, your personal
astrophysicist, bidding you all to keep
keep looking up. All right. Yes.
[Music]